src/posts/2023-07-10-bulk-updating-multiple-repos-with-all-repos/index.mdx, before:

---
date: 2023-07-10
author: browniebroke
title: 'Bulk updating multiple repos with all-repos'
description: 'A walkthrough of my setup that allows me to maintain many GitHub repos at once'
header_image: header.png
tags:
  - github
  - all-repos
  - automation
  - python
---

I like the open source communities and all the developments that they enable. As a developer, I like to have the ability to solve my own problems, but when someone else already solved the problem, it's even better. However, when nobody did, I like to share my solution with others, if possible and practical. I've done it enough times that I'm beginning to have a decent setup with a project template that gives me the boilerplate I need to get started quickly, and not waste too much time packaging and publishing my solution.

## The problem

However, after a while, maintaining all these projects can become overwhelming. And when external things change, like adding support for a new version of a language/framework, dropping an old one, or adapting to how a tool works, it can be tedious to do bulk updates. Of course, in this case, I'm not the first one to hit this problem, and there are a number of solutions out there.

## The solution

I've been using [all-repos](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos) for about a year and a half, and I'm quite happy with it. It's a tool that allows you to run a command on all or some of your GitHub repositories. It's a command line tool written in Python, that's overall quite easy to use, with an API that has a bit of a learning curve, but is very powerful. In this post, I'll show you how I use it to update my projects.

## Repository setup

I like to keep all my code in git and save it in GitHub, so I've created a [repo](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-my-repos) for using it. So, here we are, one more repo... to manage all my repos. One step back to move forward, I guess.

### Splitting the config

The [recommended usage](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos#configuring) is to create a config file, `all-repos.json`, that contains some config controlling behaviour, as well as your credentials.

However, often switch machine, and I wanted to store the config in source control to be able to share it more easily and only keep the credentials outside. This isn't supported by all-repos, and it seems to be an intentional design decision, and the author showed no intention to support it, so I created a package to do it: [all-repos-envvar](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-repos-envvar). That's now 2 more repos to maintain... I hope that's worth it!

### Learning the library

The library ships several separate CLI tools, but I must be missing their point, and actually I don't even use them.

What I really find useful is the [autofixer](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/tree/main#writing-an-autofixer), which is documented at the bottom of the README. The documentation describes the API, and then finally gives [an example autofixer](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/tree/main#example-autofixer), which has the boilerplate you need. The documentation then links to the built-in autofixers which are great examples on what you can do.

## My usage

So in my project, I have:

- A `pyproject.toml` file with the dependencies I need, managed by Poetry.
- A `all-repos.json` file that contains the config for all-repos, in git. It controls how I fetch the repos, how changes are submitted (pull request), the organisations I want to include, and some repos I want to exclude.
- My GitHub credentials, in a `.env` file that I keep outside of source control.
- Finally, I copied the given boilerplate and wrote a `run_fix.py` file which I keep changing for my need of the day.

## Example

Python 3.7 recently reached EOL, so that was a good opportunity to use the tool to update all my projects in bulk. Here is how the script looked like:

```python
from pathlib import Path

from all_repos import autofix_lib
from all_repos.grep import repos_matching

# Find repos that have this file...
FILE_NAME = "pyproject.toml"
# ... and which content contains this string.
FILE_CONTAINS = "tool.poetry"
# Git stuff
GIT_COMMIT_MSG = "feat: drop support for Python 3.7"
GIT_BRANCH_NAME = "feat/drop-python-3.7"


def apply_fix():
    """Apply fix to a matching repo."""
    pyproject_toml = Path("pyproject.toml")
    content = pyproject_toml.read_text()

    # Be idempotent
    if 'python = "^3.8"' in content:
        return

    new_content = content.replace(
        'python = "^3.7"',
        'python = "^3.8"',
    )
    pyproject_toml.write_text(new_content)

    ci_yml = Path(".github/workflows/ci.yml")
    if ci_yml.exists():
        content = ci_yml.read_text()
        content = content.replace(
            'python-version:\n          - "3.7"\n',
            "python-version:\n",
        )
        ci_yml.write_text(content)

    pc_yml = Path(".pre-commit-config.yaml")
    if pc_yml.exists():
        content = pc_yml.read_text()
        content = content.replace(
            '--py37-plus',
            '--py38-plus',
        )
        pc_yml.write_text(content)


# You shouldn't need to change anything below this line


def find_repos(config) -> set[str]:
    """Find matching repos using git grep."""
    repos = repos_matching(
        config,
        (FILE_CONTAINS, "--", FILE_NAME),
    )
    return repos


def main():
    """Entry point."""
    repos, cfg, commit, stg = autofix_lib.from_cli(
        None,
        find_repos=find_repos,
        msg=GIT_COMMIT_MSG,
        branch_name=GIT_BRANCH_NAME,
    )
    autofix_lib.fix(
        repos,
        apply_fix=apply_fix,
        config=cfg,
        commit=commit,
        autofix_settings=stg,
    )
    return 0


if __name__ == "__main__":
    raise SystemExit(main())
```

Ok that's a lot of code, so let's break it down.

### Constants

Fist off, I defined a few constants at the top of the file, which I always need to change:

1. The `FILE_...` ones are used to detect whether the repository is suitable for this change: in this example, a node project would be filtered out with this mechanism, in the `find_repos()` function.
2. the `GIT_...` ones are for the git commit message and branch. If anything changes, the tool opens a pull request which I can review before merging.

### `apply_fix()`

This is where the actual code change happens. This function runs in the context of a matching repo, and the current directory is the top of the repo. You can read and write file as you please or run commands with `autofix_lib.run(...)`. It's a good idea to start with a check to verify that the fix hasn't run yet, just in case.

### `find_repos()`

This is mainly boilerplate, it's essentially a wrapper around `git grep` and uses 2 of the constants I explained earlier. If you want to learn more, I suggest to go [read the source code of `repos_matching`](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/blob/24911de91215a214adfe2e0ea3d4d1eb5e67a42a/all_repos/grep.py#L19-L44).

### Entry point

Finally, the `main()` function is the entry point. It's called when running `python run_fix.py`, and it mostly calls the autofix API with our parameters. This is a simplified version from the boilerplate, without argument parser, since I never use that feature.

## Lifetime of the script

I keep this script around and just change it in place, committing each time I change it to make a bulk changes. It's usually some one off operations, but it's quite useful to have some history in git in case I need to something similar again, like when I'll need to drop Python 3.8. You can check [its history on GitHub](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-my-repos/commits/main/run_fix.py) to see how it evolved.

## Trade-offs

On the downside, one might argue that the code is a bit verbose, but in my opinion it's a good thing. I'm comfortable with Python, it does the job and let me use all of its power to do the changes I need, and step into a debugger when I need to.

I came across other approaches, for example, [Adam Johnson described](https://adamj.eu/tech/2020/04/02/maintaining-multiple-python-projects-with-myrepos/) how he uses a tool called [`myrepos`](https://myrepos.branchable.com/) to do something similar. It didn't fit my way of doing thing, but it might work for you.

## Conclusion

I think that's it! I hope this was useful, and will help make the all-repos tool more accessible. It's quite powerful, although I found that it had lots of things I didn't need.

Commit message:

Fix mention of argparse in all-repos post

src/posts/2023-07-10-bulk-updating-multiple-repos-with-all-repos/index.mdx, after:

---
date: 2023-07-10
author: browniebroke
title: 'Bulk updating multiple repos with all-repos'
description: 'A walkthrough of my setup that allows me to maintain many GitHub repos at once'
header_image: header.png
tags:
  - github
  - all-repos
  - automation
  - python
---

I like the open source communities and all the developments that they enable. As a developer, I like to have the ability to solve my own problems, but when someone else already solved the problem, it's even better. However, when nobody did, I like to share my solution with others, if possible and practical. I've done it enough times that I'm beginning to have a decent setup with a project template that gives me the boilerplate I need to get started quickly, and not waste too much time packaging and publishing my solution.

## The problem

However, after a while, maintaining all these projects can become overwhelming. And when external things change, like adding support for a new version of a language/framework, dropping an old one, or adapting to how a tool works, it can be tedious to do bulk updates. Of course, in this case, I'm not the first one to hit this problem, and there are a number of solutions out there.

## The solution

I've been using [all-repos](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos) for about a year and a half, and I'm quite happy with it. It's a tool that allows you to run a command on all or some of your GitHub repositories. It's a command line tool written in Python, that's overall quite easy to use, with an API that has a bit of a learning curve, but is very powerful. In this post, I'll show you how I use it to update my projects.

## Repository setup

I like to keep all my code in git and save it in GitHub, so I've created a [repo](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-my-repos) for using it. So, here we are, one more repo... to manage all my repos. One step back to move forward, I guess.

### Splitting the config

The [recommended usage](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos#configuring) is to create a config file, `all-repos.json`, that contains some config controlling behaviour, as well as your credentials.

However, often switch machine, and I wanted to store the config in source control to be able to share it more easily and only keep the credentials outside. This isn't supported by all-repos, and it seems to be an intentional design decision, and the author showed no intention to support it, so I created a package to do it: [all-repos-envvar](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-repos-envvar). That's now 2 more repos to maintain... I hope that's worth it!

### Learning the library

The library ships several separate CLI tools, but I must be missing their point, and actually I don't even use them.

What I really find useful is the [autofixer](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/tree/main#writing-an-autofixer), which is documented at the bottom of the README. The documentation describes the API, and then finally gives [an example autofixer](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/tree/main#example-autofixer), which has the boilerplate you need. The documentation then links to the built-in autofixers which are great examples on what you can do.

## My usage

So in my project, I have:

- A `pyproject.toml` file with the dependencies I need, managed by Poetry.
- A `all-repos.json` file that contains the config for all-repos, in git. It controls how I fetch the repos, how changes are submitted (pull request), the organisations I want to include, and some repos I want to exclude.
- My GitHub credentials, in a `.env` file that I keep outside of source control.
- Finally, I copied the given boilerplate and wrote a `run_fix.py` file which I keep changing for my need of the day.

## Example

Python 3.7 recently reached EOL, so that was a good opportunity to use the tool to update all my projects in bulk. Here is how the script looked like:

```python
import argparse
from pathlib import Path

from all_repos import autofix_lib
from all_repos.grep import repos_matching

# Find repos that have this file...
FILE_NAME = "pyproject.toml"
# ... and which content contains this string.
FILE_CONTAINS = "tool.poetry"
# Git stuff
GIT_COMMIT_MSG = "feat: drop support for Python 3.7"
GIT_BRANCH_NAME = "feat/drop-python-3.7"


def apply_fix():
    """Apply fix to a matching repo."""
    pyproject_toml = Path("pyproject.toml")
    content = pyproject_toml.read_text()

    # Be idempotent
    if 'python = "^3.8"' in content:
        return

    new_content = content.replace(
        'python = "^3.7"',
        'python = "^3.8"',
    )
    pyproject_toml.write_text(new_content)

    ci_yml = Path(".github/workflows/ci.yml")
    if ci_yml.exists():
        content = ci_yml.read_text()
        content = content.replace(
            'python-version:\n          - "3.7"\n',
            "python-version:\n",
        )
        ci_yml.write_text(content)

    pc_yml = Path(".pre-commit-config.yaml")
    if pc_yml.exists():
        content = pc_yml.read_text()
        content = content.replace(
            '--py37-plus',
            '--py38-plus',
        )
        pc_yml.write_text(content)


# You shouldn't need to change anything below this line


def find_repos(config) -> set[str]:
    """Find matching repos using git grep."""
    repos = repos_matching(
        config,
        (FILE_CONTAINS, "--", FILE_NAME),
    )
    return repos


def main():
    """Entry point."""
    # Needed to add all-repos command line options
    # and ability to parse config
    parser = argparse.ArgumentParser()
    autofix_lib.add_fixer_args(parser)
    args = parser.parse_args(None)

    repos, cfg, commit, stg = autofix_lib.from_cli(
        args,
        find_repos=find_repos,
        msg=GIT_COMMIT_MSG,
        branch_name=GIT_BRANCH_NAME,
    )
    autofix_lib.fix(
        repos,
        apply_fix=apply_fix,
        config=cfg,
        commit=commit,
        autofix_settings=stg,
    )
    return 0


if __name__ == "__main__":
    raise SystemExit(main())
```

Ok that's a lot of code, so let's break it down.

### Constants

Fist off, I defined a few constants at the top of the file, which I always need to change:

1. The `FILE_...` ones are used to detect whether the repository is suitable for this change: in this example, a node project would be filtered out with this mechanism, in the `find_repos()` function.
2. the `GIT_...` ones are for the git commit message and branch. If anything changes, the tool opens a pull request which I can review before merging.

### `apply_fix()`

This is where the actual code change happens. This function runs in the context of a matching repo, and the current directory is the top of the repo. You can read and write file as you please or run commands with `autofix_lib.run(...)`. It's a good idea to start with a check to verify that the fix hasn't run yet, just in case.

### `find_repos()`

This is mainly boilerplate, it's essentially a wrapper around `git grep` and uses 2 of the constants I explained earlier. If you want to learn more, I suggest to go [read the source code of `repos_matching`](https://github.com/asottile/all-repos/blob/24911de91215a214adfe2e0ea3d4d1eb5e67a42a/all_repos/grep.py#L19-L44).

### Entry point

Finally, the `main()` function is the entry point. It's called when running `python run_fix.py`, and it mostly calls the autofix API with our parameters. This is a slightly simplified version from the boilerplate.

## Lifetime of the script

I keep this script around and just change it in place, committing each time I change it to make a bulk changes. It's usually some one off operations, but it's quite useful to have some history in git in case I need to something similar again, like when I'll need to drop Python 3.8. You can check [its history on GitHub](https://github.com/browniebroke/all-my-repos/commits/main/run_fix.py) to see how it evolved.

## Trade-offs

On the downside, one might argue that the code is a bit verbose, but in my opinion it's a good thing. I'm comfortable with Python, it does the job and let me use all of its power to do the changes I need, and step into a debugger when I need to.

I came across other approaches, for example, [Adam Johnson described](https://adamj.eu/tech/2020/04/02/maintaining-multiple-python-projects-with-myrepos/) how he uses a tool called [`myrepos`](https://myrepos.branchable.com/) to do something similar. It didn't fit my way of doing thing, but it might work for you.

## Conclusion

I think that's it! I hope this was useful, and will help make the all-repos tool more accessible. It's quite powerful, although I found that it had lots of things I didn't need.
